# MCEC Keys (Codes)

In the MCEC project we use the word 'keys' rather than '[codes](Terms-and-definitions.md#re-identification-code)' to refer to any descriptors used to label research data records for file naming, contacting participants, etc. There are three types of keys used by the MCEC team. Ranked by its level of confidentiality (1 being the most confidential), these are:

1. Re-identification keys
2. MCEC contact keys
3. Anonymization keys

## Re-identification keys

"A re-identification code enables an authorized researcher to return to the source of de-identified data and match the de-identified data to the source records." [Glossary, Protecting Student Privacy, 2021/02/07](https://studentprivacy.ed.gov/glossary#glossary-node-239)

Re-identification keys are the most important keys for confidentiality purposes. Only the co-directors of the MCEC project, Damian Romero and Hanyu Jia, have access to re-identification table that matches the re-identification keys to participant's data. Limiting access to the re-identification table makes it so that the re-identification keys cannot be used by MCEC Team members or any other person to identify a student or personally identifiable information about a student. Damian Romero is the only researcher with the knowledge of the method used to produce and assign these keys.  ([Seastrom, 2010, p. 6](https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2011601))

Following FERPA guidelines ([34 CFR § 99.31(b)(2)](https://studentprivacy.ed.gov/node/548/#0.1_se34.1.99_131)), our re-identification codes are not based on participants' personal information. We do not share how the re-identification codes are generated or assigned. Only MCEC co-directors Damian Romero and Hanyu Jia will use these keys to match de-identified records to the source materials for education research purposes.

Internal MCEC data files (e.g. email files) are named by Damian Romero and Hanyu Jia using these re-identification keys. This allows the other members of the MCEC Team to work on data anonymization (anonymization checks, redaction of indirect identifiers, suppression of personal information, etc.). The use of re-identification keys also offers an extra layer of protection to any inadvertent or unauthorized disclosures of personal information.

TL;DR

   - Re-identification key access: MCEC Team. However, Access to the de-identification table is restricted to MCEC co-directors.
   - Use: Internal academic research and anonymization by the MCEC Team without disclosing direct identifiers.
   - Note: Internal MCEC data files are named using re-identification keys. Using re-identification keys also offers an extra layer of confidentiality.

## MCEC contact keys

TL;DR

   - MCEC contact key access: Participants have access to their own MCEC contact key. MCEC Principal Investigators (P.I. and Co-PIs) authorized by the University of Arizona's Human Subjects Protection Program have access to the MCEC contact keys table in case they need to address participants' questions, concerns or requests such as deleting data from unpublished records.
   - Use: Only used for participants to contact the MCEC Team PIs. This is generated by the MCEC Email Generator Tool (MCEC-EmG).
   - Note: These keys are not linked to any participant data.

## Anonymization keys

TL;DR

   - Anonymization key access: Public. No de-identification table exists.
   - Use: Public version of the corpus with no re-identification (record) keys. 
   - Note: These keys are not linked to any personally identifiable information. Anonymization keys are assigned to individual email conversations irrespectively of whether or not two or more conversations involve the same interlocutors. As a result, researchers cannot use these keys to match individual records across
previously de-identified data files from the same source (e.g., to compare student emails over several years). However, we believe this is the best alternative to respect participant's privacy.

## References

[Seastrom, M. (2010). Basic concepts and definitions for privacy and confidentiality in student education records (NCES 2011–601). Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, US Department of Education. Gov/Pubsearch/Pubsinfo. Asp.](https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2011601)